never let a good crisis go to waste
winston churchill's famous words from
the darkest days of world war
ii have taken on a more sinister meaning
as the decades have passed
this quote was actually meant to be an
inspirational message of hope to the
british people
but these days more cynical onlookers
see that people with ill intent can use
a crisis
just as well as those who are virtuous
the great reset is a collective name
given to a series of economic policies
that are attempting to use the recovery
from the coronavirus as a way to
supposedly build a better
brighter more sustainable future this
policy was first unveiled by the world
economic forum and the united kingdom's
prince charles and since this
announcement it has gathered support
from a laundry list of economists
politicians business people
and celebrities but it has also gathered
a fair bit of criticism
just 72 hours after its announcement a
petition to stop it
gained 80 000 signatures which is kind
of fair enough
the whole premise of this proposal does
sound very ominous
economic plans titled the great
something have not exactly had the best
track record
the fact that this plan is leveraging a
disaster alongside the fact that it is
pushing some pretty spicy policies
means that major conspiracy theories
have surfaced ranging from this plan
will make us all poorer
all the way up to this plan will make us
all slaves to the lizard people
now in fairness the marketing around
this great reset has not helped its case
at
all if someone was to try and research
what this plan actually was
they would be presented with two
extremely bizarre ads that explain
absolutely nothing and a two-hour panel
which is extremely boring even to a
major economics nerd like myself
and also kind of equally as unhelpful we
know this because well
we had to research this plan to make
this video so it sounds like some
economics need to be explained
and to properly do this we're going to
need to look at a few key questions
what is the great reset actually
proposing to do
do these ideas have any merit who are
the players involved in pushing this
agenda
and is this actually a nefarious scheme
or just the victim
of terrible marketing this episode of
economics explained was made possible by
our fans on patreon
if you would like to gain early access
to these videos before they're uploaded
to youtube
as well as participate in exclusive q a
sessions which are now held every
saturday at 9 30 eastern standard time
please consider supporting our channel
at patreon.com
economics explained now perhaps one of
the largest concerns shared amongst
rational onlookers to this great reset
proposal
is the distinct lack of support from
economists time magazine has created a
page to help
explain the idea and it's broken the
proposal down into featurettes from its
key supporters
these are models cellists reddit
co-founders
ex-royals but outside of claus schwab
the chairman of the world economic forum
there are no economists for what it's
worth class schwab is actually an
engineer by education but
he is brilliant in his own right so that
one's fair enough now a lot of this is
because people like prince harry and
meghan markle are going to attract a lot
more attention than people like paul
krugman or thomas piketty
something something decline of society
but you know what again that's fair
enough plenty of brilliant ideas make it
nowhere because they fail to get any
attention
the second reason this page of
supporters is devoid of economists is
because the great reset
has for better or worse become more than
just an economic plan
it has become a bloated wish list of
things ranging from independent media to
demilitarization
support for the arts to sustainable
architecture which
may very well be credible and important
arguments in their own right but
only work to make this whole proposal
more confusing
at best or more confronting at worst
so for the sake of simplicity we're
going to go ahead and ignore all the
fluff that has been tacked on
and focus purely on the economic
proposals
because oh boy there are still a lot of
them
but the foundational point of all of
this is this
single point so if you remember just one
thing from the great reset
make sure it is this the great reset
plans to ensure that every recovery
stimulus
both fiscal and monetary from now on
must include green conditions
given that 2020 has been a very rocky
year and fiscal stimulus has been a
major topic
we have spoken about these policies many
many times on this channel
we've explored infrastructure spending
in china just last week we looked at
quantitative easing in japan and the
united states and a host of other
policies from a diverse group of nations
one common theme we saw amongst all of
this is that fiscal stimulus is a great
opportunity to put money towards
something that needs to be improved in
the nation
if a country desperately needs new
highways more funding for schooling or
you know what
even a stronger military fiscal stimulus
is a great way to provide that spending
the key objective of stimulus is to get
money out into the economy
and into the hands of people that can go
out and spend it that spending keeps
businesses open
people employed and quality of life
improving
now pretty much any type of government
spending will
achieve this core goal throwing money
off the tallest building in a selection
of major cities
will achieve this goal but there are
alternatives that achieve the same core
results
while also having some happy little side
effects
infrastructure spending is a great
example of this
we talked about it briefly in our last
video and i don't want to repeat too
much
but governments putting money towards
building new pieces of infrastructure
will achieve their goal of getting money
out into the economy in the form of
paychecks to workers
contracts to builders and commissions to
architects and engineers
but they will also have something left
over to provide utility for decades to
come
what this great reset is proposing is
something similar
but channeled exclusively towards
building out infrastructure for green
technologies there are a lot of
advantages to installing solar panels on
your home
so long as you live in a reasonably
sunny area it will reduce your energy
bills to the point where the system will
pay for itself a few times over
it also reduces your carbon footprint
and may even add value to the property
itself
however the upfront cost is a
prohibitive hurdle for a lot of
households
similar situations exist on a nationwide
level a modernized and expanded rail
network in a city like los angeles would
work to take thousands of cars off the
road reducing emissions congestions and
lost time for commuters
but the upfront expense would probably
take it out of consideration
however if a fraction of the two
trillion dollars was rolled out in the
initial wave of fiscal stimulus was
redirected towards a project like this
the cost would be comparatively trivial
while still achieving the desired
results of putting money into people's
pocket during times of economic
uncertainty
now i'm not a city planner so this
example is exactly that
and there probably is hundreds of better
ways to spend this money on renewable
infrastructure
but the point is that getting that money
out there while redirecting it through a
project like this or building a wind
farm or a fleet of electric buses or
whatever
is literally a win-win now you might be
thinking well that sounds excellent
even the most staunch
anti-environmentalists would agree that
it's probably better to get
something for those government dollars
than nothing at all right and well yeah
it really is a great idea but there are
problems
for starters it can be really slow to
implement
it's all well and good to say we will
build some amazing new wind farm that
will power an entire city
but there is a lot that goes into that
plans have to be drawn up proposals need
to be accepted
land needs to be procured turbines need
to be manufactured
and only once all of this is done can
tradesmen and labourers start getting
paid to put this whole plan together
this could take years all the while
people are losing jobs going hungry and
not contributing to economic growth
say what you will about just giving
people money but it is
fast the second issue with this kind of
scheme is that money is channeled
towards a group that may
or may not need it as much as others a
typical project like let's say our wind
farm
will be handled through a corporation
that specializes in these types of
contracts
their goal will actually be to spend as
little money as possible on labor
because any money spent there is money
that isn't taken as
profit and yeah sure that profit money
will eventually find its way to
shareholders or be reinvested into the
company itself
but that is money that is not going to
be recirculated nearly as quickly as a
check in the hands of a working class
family the final problem is
what to do with the infrastructure once
it's there it could be privatized in an
attempt to recoup some of the expense of
building it in the first place
but then a potential vital public
service is in the hands of a private
company
and any benefits it provides will be
left behind a paywall of swords
be it a toll for a highway higher
electricity costs or a more expensive
ticket to ride on a train
this is on top of the optics of
privatization which can sometimes be a
little bit
politically spicy of course the
alternative is just to keep the project
as a public asset
but then it's just another piece of
infrastructure that will need to be
maintained on taxpayers dimes
which could be unpopular to the people
that don't directly benefit from it
a potential solution to at least half of
these problems would be to have a
comprehensive list of projects
pre-planned and ready to implement
quickly after a downturn
complete with a plan for the project to
cover its own costs or be shared
equitably amongst taxpayers who will
fund it
of course easier said than done but if
governments did have the forward vision
to put some projects in the metaphorical
chamber then you know what
nobody would have any major problem with
this kind of strategy
if the great reset was a challenge to
governments to create these kinds of
plans and have them ready for the next
downturn
it would probably have a slightly more
favorable reception
but advocating for doing this right now
is just on an achievable goal
for many people companies and economies
which are simply looking to survive
through the next few months
of course this proposal was one of just
many incorporated into the narrative of
the great reset
and the list is comprehensive and
controversial
so let's see what else the fuss is all
about now these are the takeaway issues
that we were able to discern from the
articles published by the wef
again probably one of the biggest issues
with this whole proposal is that it's
just really hard to tell
what the proposal is but i digress it's
time for a speed round to get through
them all
one point is to push for investment into
technological education so that workers
around the world are better suited for
employment in increasingly tech focused
industries like logistics manufacturing
and retail
and you know what fair enough that's
probably a good call education is of
course something that i
am very passionate about and making sure
everyone has access to good applicable
knowledge is vital for maintaining a
strong workforce
so long as this education is directed
towards in-demand fields
this is an investment that will pay
dividends many times over on an
individual
national and global level the next
proposal is to encourage
long-term investments by private sector
into sustainable industries
and yeah this is a bit of a tough one
certainly there are huge advantages to
carrying this out
but it is market intervention so there
will be critics
a carbon tax is an effective way to
achieve what this point is proposing
carbon emissions are what we call a
negative externality
this is something that costs everybody
in the wider economy regardless of if
they are benefiting from those emissions
putting attacks on these emissions would
mean that the external cost borne by
society
is also a cost borne by the emitter and
this money can either be collected as
revenue to use on public goods so at
least the wider community is getting
something for the medical price that
they are paying
or in the best case scenario it will
encourage businesses to invest into
lower emitting alternatives to avoid
this cost
altogether a large part of tesla's
revenue currently comes from selling
unused allowances for emissions to
companies that are less green in their
operations
now a good group of people would support
policies like this
but many wouldn't so perhaps a more
applicable takeaway
might be that governments don't need to
subsidize solar farms or roll out carbon
taxes just yet
but perhaps they should stop subsidizing
major emitters
that's like paying in actual dollars to
pay with intangible costs
silly stuff and surprisingly a
widespread problem
the next proposal is to roll out a new
dashboard for measuring economic success
beyond just gdp metrics and well you
know what
no problem there either hey world
economic forum i will lend you the
economics explained national leader
board just give me a ticket to davos
next year yeah
in all seriousness though no problems
here gdp has its uses but it gets way
more attention than it should
social metrics as well as things like an
increase in collective net worth are
sometimes far
more telling than gdp figures are alone
the next point is to encourage
entrepreneurs to establish new
technologies and environmentally ethical
rules
[Music]
look this is nice in theory and full
disclaimer
believe it or not i am personally a big
supporter of protecting the environment
by living below your means walking
instead of driving recycling
all of that good stuff but it just isn't
the role of business it's really the
role of policymakers and the
responsibility of individuals
businesses generate profit and keeping
their motivations pure
and singular makes for better economies
now
if maintaining ethical environmental
standards were baked into their profit
motive
well that's great people love hearing
about businesses that have neutral
carbon footprints or
treat their employees well and those
businesses get rewarded with
conscientious dollars
a better solution to this would be to
work on making consumers demand higher
standards of corporations
and encouraging competition that could
challenge companies that do not meet
these standards
saying that companies should sit down
and sing kumbaya with one another
sounds nice in theory but in practice
they have duty to their shareholders
you don't use a hammer to fix a laptop
so just don't use corporations to
implement ethical regulation
there are just better tools for the job
now so far these policies have been a
bit optimistic but not exactly
evil it would probably be difficult to
see how people would think this is a
plan for world domination
if it weren't for one final piece of the
puzzle
terrible marketing this is a direct
extract from the world economic forum's
collaboration with time magazine on this
issue
in which the two organizations paint a
picture of a future world where the
great reset has been implemented
by all governments the year is 2023
the covert 19 pandemic has come to an
end and the global economy is on a path
to recovery
how did we get here the u.s began to
change its approach after november 3rd
2020 when joe biden defeated donald
trump in the presidential election
and the democrats held the majority in
both houses of congress
following his inauguration in january
2021 biden moved quickly to rebuild
frayed ties between america and europe
setting up a forum to share collective
intelligence that could inform a smarter
form of government
european governments who are eager to
learn from investment strategies used by
the us government like those led by
defence research agency darpa to spur
research and development into high-risk
technologies
the european leadership used
challenge-orientated policies to create
100 carbon-neutral cities across the
continent
governments used a digital revolution to
improve public services from digital
health to e-cards and create a
citizen-centred welfare state
holy partisanship batman the article
continues on like this and i will leave
a link in the video description for
those who want to read it in full
now you may personally support
everything that has been said here and
that's great
but you have to realize how blatantly
partisan it is
it also pushes globalist ideas and
advocating for nations to openly share
their intellectual property
now this in reality is what people are
taking issue with
the world economic forum sounds like it
should be well a
forum and one that positions itself
above agendas like this one
but of course it isn't and understanding
what the world economic forum actually
is will teach us a lot about what this
whole proposal
is in reality and why even the most
staunch rivals to its policies
shouldn't be overly afraid of it the
world economic forum is a non-government
organization
probably best known for their annual
meetings held in davos switzerland where
thousands of wealthy people descend on a
small alpine village to talk about
all things economics it makes a majority
of its money through membership fees
which are steep they range anywhere from
sixty seven thousand dollars a year to
seven
hundred thousand dollars per year
depending on the level of engagement
with the organization
so who are these members well obviously
very rich people
or influential public figures that get
complementary invites
so by virtue of the fact that it
attracts the type of people who can
afford this membership
it is influential but it's not like the
united nations or the international
monetary fund or the world bank
as much as it would like you to believe
that it is it's for lack of a better way
of putting it
a book club for woke billionaires where
the only thing that they discuss are
economics textbooks
the great reset may as well be the great
gatsby
it's not really a genuine proposal it's
a hypothetical to stir up conversation
and maybe a little bit of controversy
that's how they get attention
which is how they get membership which
is how they maintain
influence and relevance and now since i
have totally destroyed my chances i've
ever been invited to davos as a guest
speaker to bring this message to you all
go and support the channel on patreon it
might not make up for those sweet sweet
guest speaker dollar you do's but
you will be continuing to make these
videos possible just like these awesome
people did
so thanks guys bye